Okay, so at this point, we are going
to jump into our first project,
which is called are tests passing?
And if you were able to click that
data visualization for steps link
at the top of the original notebook,
you should see this sidebar here.
And so right now, we are in the notebook
Project: Are tests passing?
So if anybody had any difficulties
accessing that, please let me know, but
hopefully, we're all
literally on the same page.
All right, so this is going to be
our first exposure, as it were,
to working in an interactive
Observable environment.
So what we're looking at is an Observable
notebook, which means it is a combination
of code right up here, in this case, text
and some headings and things like that.
And visualizations,
which is what we're gonna be building.
This is the starting point,
not the ending point.
So what we're gonna be doing is,
filling out some to-dos
essentially in this notebook.
And I'll walk you through kind of
what that is going to feel like.
So first of all,
a little context around this project.
We're going to be visualizing some
data from the GitHub Actions API.
If folks haven't worked
with GitHub Actions,
these are essentially kind of
automation tasks or processes or jobs,
as they're called, that you can set
up to run on your GitHub projects.
For example, to run tests in
continuous integration, among many,
many other things.
But what we're gonna be looking at are,
again, as we saw briefly in the intro,
some data around tests running
in CI as GitHub Actions.
And so what we've got here in Observable,
we can attach data files to our notebooks,
as I mentioned briefly before.
What we've got is essentially a JSON
file already attached to the notebook.
That represents the data that you might
get if you had downloaded some data
from the GitHub API about jobs running
on the open source public SvelteJS repo,
just as an example of
something publicly available.
And in this case, we've actually already
done a little bit of wrangling on this
data to exclude or filter out some of the
data that we don't need for this exercise.
And to do a little bit of processing
to make it easier to visualize.
In the next exercise, we're gonna do
a tiny bit of data wrangling ourselves.
But for this one, we've assumed we've
already got that taken care of, and so
we can jump right into the visualization.
So what we're doing here
in this first cell is we're
parsing that file attachment using
a built-in function from Observable.
And we're just telling
Observable to read it as JSON.
So then we get essentially
this testJobs object,
it's an adjacent array of
objects that have information
about different runs of
different test jobs.
And what we're doing here is we're
just exploring it in table format.
Later on in our project that
explores interactivity,
we're gonna take a closer
look at these inputs.
But this is just to make it
a little bit more human readable
than that JSON object itself.
So when we're editing Observable code,
what we're going to be
doing is essentially
editing in these little gray or
blue boxes where we see
the sort of JavaScript looking code here.
So for example, I can add a comment or
I can say, I don't know.
Let's say just get the 0th indexed
element in this testJobs data.
And once I've edited something
in one of these codes,
I'll see a little blue play
button show up on the right.
So I can click that or
press Shift+Enter as a handy
keyboard shortcut that then
you're gonna be doing all day.
So we'll get used to it.
But I can either click this play button or
press Shift+Enter to update the,
of course, this is an interval now
[LAUGH] to break the code, and
then press Shift+Enter
again to unbreak it.
So this is what we're
gonna be doing today.
We're gonna be editing some of these
cells to put in our own code, and
then reevaluating or rerunning these
cells to see the value update.
So we'll take a look at this
in our first actual exercise.
So here we've got our
first plot visualization.
This is a very simple and
not yet very useful
visualization of this test
job data that uses a mark.
So remember we said marks are these
different elements that we can draw on
the screen.
In this case,
we're using a mark called a cell,
which are these little kind of rectangles
here, similar to cells in a table.
And so what this plot is doing is
essentially drawing a little cell or
a rectangle for each row in the dataset.
And each run number kind
of gets its own positioned,
in this case,
column of all of the different jobs,
the different tests that ran in
that particular numbered run.
And here, the run numbers are sequential.
We could, for example, be visualizing
something else like timestamps here, but
here, we're just visualizing
them run by run.
So let's take a look at the code that
makes this visualization tick and
understand what's happening.
So this is how we create a new plot.
We call Plot.plot.
And then inside of the call
to the method lowercase plot,
we're going to give it an object
that specifies the options or
the configuration, as it were,
for this chart, this plot.
So the first thing we're gonna
wanna do is pass in an array
of marks to tell plot which
marks we want it to draw.
In this case, we're using a cell mark.
And we're gonna explore some different
types of marks in our future projects, but
for now, we'll just stick with cells.
Each mark basically takes in the data
that we want to draw the marks with.
In this case, it's called testJobs.
It's that JSON array that we saw before.
Well, it's a JavaScript object
cuz we parsed in the JSON file.
And then we're going to pass
in essentially a mapping.
So a little object that maps
channels in the visualization,
which we're gonna explain
in a bit more detail.
But in this case,
we have an x position and
a y position as the kind of
outputs in our visualization.
And it's going to say for
each of those output channels,
what is the input value that I should be
mapping or sort of scaling to this output?
So in this case, the run number
value is gonna go on the x-axis, so
that's these numbers
running horizontally here.
And then the name of the test job,
which is called name in our dataset,
is going to be on the y-axis.
So that's why we have all these
different names of jobs vertically here.
So that's it for our marks array.
That's the only mark we wanna draw in
this visualization, but in others,
you could have multiple different
types of marks going on.
And then we're going to have some
just sort of general properties
of the way plot is drawing
its chart on the screen.
So the width here, in Observable,
we get a little automatic
variable called width,
which essentially scales to the size,
the width of the cell,
this sort of area here on the page.
And then we have just some margin setup so
that we make a little extra room for
these text labels.
We also have some information
passed to the x scale
to tell it to rotate
the labels 45 degrees.
So that's why we get these
angled labels on the x-axis.
So this is one example of a simple plot.
Essentially, we've got the information for
each individual mark.
In this case, we just have one, the cell.
And then we have some information about
the plot as a whole and the scales that
configure the different output channels
that we are drawing information to.
So let's talk about
channels a little bit more.
When we're working with plot, and again,
this is inspired by
the grammar of graphics.
So this is a more general data viz
concept than just plot library.
You'll see this also implemented
in other data viz libraries.
When we're working with marks in plot,
again, we are going to be expressing
values in the data as visual properties
of different types in our visualization.
And those different types
are called channels.
So we saw, for example,
we saw we have the x channel,
which is essentially
a horizontal position.
We have the y channel for
vertical position.
And then if we dig into the plot
documentation on GitHub, which is linked
here, we can see some of the other
channels that we have available to us,
and there are a few.
But a few that we're gonna
care about here might be fill,
which is essentially the color inside
of the rectangles or other shapes
we might be doing like a dot mark that
might also have a filled interior.
Or the fillOpacity, so
the opacity of that inner shading.
Similarly, we might have the stroke or
the outline of each of those cells or
other marks, dots, what have you.
Or, for example, if we're using a line
mark, then that would be a stroke.
Stroke would be the relevant property for
the color of that line.
And similarly, strokeOpacity,
so the opacity of that outline.
We also have a channel called title,
which essentially configures tool
tips on each of the little marks,
so in this case, each of the cells.
So what we're gonna do in our first
exercise is to use some of these other
channels to make this
chart more informative.
Because right now,
I am not getting a whole lot of
information from these squares.
So if we scroll down a little bit,
our first to do here is to use the fill
channel, so the fill color of each of
these rectangles to visualize the
conclusion status of each of the tests.
So did they succeed, fail,
or were they canceled?
So what we're gonna need to do is take
the column in the data that corresponds
to that.
Which if we look up here,
we can see that column with the success or
cancellation or
what have you is called conclusion.
And so that's what we're gonna need to map
to the fill channel to get this going.
So as our first exercise, take some time
to fill out this part of the code here.
Put your own code in here.
Again, you don't need an Observable
account to be editing this.
But if you already have
an Observable account or
if you're interested in saving
your work in your own copy or
your own fork of this notebook so
that you can come back to it later.
Feel free to scroll up to the top and
you should see a little sign in or
sign up button at the top right.
But if you don't want to,
that is completely fine.
You can just edit this code here, and then
press Shift+Enter to watch me break this.
Excellent, okay,
cuz this is not JavaScript, but
essentially to update whatever
changes you've made to the cell.
Below this cell, you'll notice a couple
of buttons to give you some hints.
So if you're a little confused or
stuck, take a look at the Hint button.
And then if you wanna see one potential
solution, there's also a button for that.
So let's take a couple of minutes and
try to map the conclusion
column to the fill channel.